I have told you, the other day that these
vibrations are power of Brahma and
that this Earth, the
Stars they revolve
and it is a living force.
It is the power which
is giving us the living force.
It is the living
force and it is not easy
to understand what
is a living force and what is a dead force?
Living force is very
simple to understand.
An animal, say a little worm, is a living
force. It can turn itself the way it likes.
It can save itself from
danger. It may be a small little thing, but
because it is
living it can save itself.
But something that
is dead cannot move by itself.
can not comprehend,
cannot save itself.
So, the “Self” part does not
remain in it, as far as it is concerned.
Now, being a
living force, we should try to find out,
“Are we going
to be the living force
or the dead one”.
Now, when we live in the world,
we start thinking
about our comforts;
when we are pleased,
when are soothed
When we think
of all these things,
you see, we are
thinking of the dead.
But when we think
of having a place or a house or an Ashram
from the angle
that you Will be doing some living work,
then you are
giving life to that place.
That atmosphere should be created
from all that is dead-
to create the living force.
This is a very very subtle thing, which
very few people understand, for example, now
somebody brings me
a Shri Ganesh's photo
and says, “Should I worship
this Shri Ganesh’s photograph or not”.
First of all, we should see
if vibrations are coming from it or not.
Supposing you take
a house somewhere, you must see that
this house is
it giving us vibrations.
This is the cause,
we see other things, why we even see
whether it is good for other people to
come in or not,
but we do not see
the house from vibrations point of view.
For anything
that we do, we should check the vibrations.
[INAUDIBLE- Meanwhile now, to think in terms of vibratory awareness
which means awareness that is working upon living things.]
And say, a cell at the tip
of the root is a living thing. Of course,
it does not think, it is directed
by the living force itself. So, it knows
how to move with the living force
because to live with it and to understand
the plan of the living force to
get along with it and how to merge with it.
But, we human beings have got the
freedom to decide.
Now, once you are
realized you have got that living force.
This is the living force
as you get. So, you
have to know how
to use this living force to
keep your this body,
mind, ego, superego and everything
in an enlightened state, by understanding
the planning of the living force.
It gives you all the ideas as to
most of the problems. For example, here in
this country and specially in Delhi, I
find that you catch on the left Nabhi,
catch on the right Swadishthana and
then you catch
on the Heart and also on your Agnya.
These are the four Chakras which deal with
our being. So, let us try from the left
side. What happens? On the left side
the problem starts from left swadhishthna,
because that is the first Chakra
that starts emitting the negativity within
us. Now, this left Swadishthana is actually
under control only of Shri Ganesh because
Shri Ganesh is the beginning of life
and Ganesh is the link between the
life and the death.
So Ganesha is one who gives the
balance, the “Vivek” the understanding to
you by which you know how far to go
with the things. Now, left Swadhishthana
catches, you start
going to other people
who try to promise you that such things,
like “I will give you this and that,
this will happen, that will happen
to you”. But this left sided thing can come
from our own desire for wrong things.
For example, we might be desiring for
the very wrong; we might be thinking
that let us have this kind of a dead thing
or that kind of dead thing or some sort
of a special thing that he wants to keep,
he wants to keep,
he wants to keep
INAUDIBLE
He must go to the
fridge, because he wants a
fridge, and he
must get it. Why he wants a fridge ?
Because
he thinks it will give him more comfort.
But, when he brings
the fridge, he knows that it is not so.
So, the best
way to look at all dead things is not to
go too far with them.
If you have, well and
good. If you do not have, well and good.
You can live with minimum of minimum or you
can live with maximum of maximum of these.
But when we start expanding
our dead possessions, it is very much bad.
Then our
attention goes into the dead. That’s how
we move into our subconscious
then over to collective subconscious.
Then it moves higher at the left Nabhi,
and at left Nabhi, we start becoming
crazy about these dead
things. For example, the watch, the Time.
Time is a dead
thing, it is not a living
things. It has nothing
to do with living thing.
For example, you cannot say exactly at
what time the flower will become a fruit.
So this watch or time has nothing to
do with the living force at all. It is
human mind or man-made like the watch;
particularly time is also man made. For
example, today, time here is something,
but in England it is different. So if
if you say you get up at 4 O'clock in India
is the same at Engliand, is not correct.
So, the timing
is not important. What time you arrive
what time you go, how
many times you do it, is not ‘important.
Because it is a living
force; it has no time limit or space limit,
you cannot count it, the
way it moves, the way it works out. Because
it is a living force. Once we understand
this that it is a living force which is
spontaneous, which
is not bothered about our dead ideas,
now we have come out of the dead. We
were first stones, then we became amoebae,
then we gradually became human beings.
So, our attention is all the time towards
the dead. What should we
get, what should we have, what is the needs
we have of this body
which is going to die.
We do not see to the needs of the Spirit.
By seeing to the needs of the spirit,
only you can overcome the left side.
Such start looking also goes to your
spirit from which you can know that you get
your vibrations. If your Spirit is happy,
you get your vibrations, if it
is unhappy, you do not get the vibrations.
Such a common thing! If
you have any disease on left hand side or
a problem on left hand
side, to give it a balance, you put your
attention to the future. But then people
get stuck up on the future. You see,
if I say you look to the future. As dead
is dead and is illusion, is not living,
in the same way future is
also not living, which is also not there.
So both the things are just
the same. Whether you go to left or right,
whether you go to the subconscious
or the supraconscious mind, both
the thing is just the
same. So, no use going to the past,
but if you
are too much in the past, it is better
to think of the future,
so that you are pushed
little bit to the contrary state.
But, it is difficult for you, human beings.
Now, the other
problem starts within of,
then we start feeling guilty,
then left Vishuddhi catches.
Left Vishuddhi catches because we
start feeling guilty about whatever we are
and that, which should
be said that, “I should
have not done
this or I should not have done that”.
Then you start saying, “I am very miserable,
miserable and I am myself very guilty”.
So further you don't ask for anything
else. This is another nonsense.
That is how once
you start doing that,
then what happens is that you again
become dead.
Because living force
will never condemn. No, it will Never.
It goes on progressing itself. It sees,
which side to move, this side or that side.
It is not going to condemn itself. It is
not going to aggress anything.
It has that wisdom
to be in the Centre.
That is how people should over-come
their left side, by putting their attention
away from the dead
things, that are there.
Must watch from the Centre.
When you are on the left
side, what you want to see, you don’t see.
But then ultimately to escape all this,
what you do is to start blaming yourself
all the time and feeling miserable.
But this is the way you start ending up
with your left side
into a very miserable state, that is the
culmination of all these attachments
to the left side. So, ultimately
you start thinking that you are good
for nothing, you are
useless, you should
have done this, you should have done that.
Now, at this time to overcome
it, you have to count your blessings.
Count your Blessings
one by one. You have got your Realization.
During thousands
of years how many have got realization?
You have got your vibrations.
In so many centuries, how many people have
got them? It is written in Jain system
that there were altogether
26 Kashyaps (Realized Souls).
So, even after Buddha,
how many got their realization?
You must thank God also that there are
so many realized people, they talk the same
And you must thank yourself
also, that everything can be known to you.
But, when you start catching on the
left, you go to the past and
Start thinking, you think
and you start saying,
“Oh God ? I am so useless, I am
good for nothing. I am useless, that I am
still catching”. As you know, ‘the left
hand side, those who catch are always
complaining, always grudging type
because poor things, they suffer. Now, to
match with that the other
side, so, if I tell you that you go to the
other side also, it is a very very
dangerous game. For example, we have so many
conditionings in our lives. You see, first
of all reaching that our desire is to
become excellent Sahaja Yogis,
to become Master Gurus and something great
and this and that; that
there should be many disciples that
they should touch our feet
and we should be called Great Gurus etc.
So, in Sahaja Yoga there are things
that are prohibited that no Sahaja Yogi
should touch anybody’s
feet and no Sahaja
Yogi should allow
anyone to touch their feet.
This is one of the great
Bandhanas for all Sahaja Yogis that no body
should touch each other’s feet
and nor anybody should touch your feet,
whatever may be your quality, whatever
you may be. Those who will touch will loose
vibrations, and those who will get
salutations will also catch; they will catch
on the heart.
So, such conditions, in fact we have
about Sahaja Yoga also, should be removed.
We are all of us growing together. We
are part and parcel of one personality.
All are equal, nobody is higher or lower.
The one who still thinks the slightest
like this will go down faster.
This is the left side conditioning, where
people falter very much.
So, such desires must be given up in
Sahaja Yoga.
You, must have very
wider desires in Sahaja Yoga that all of us
must get realization-say as many as possible.
We should try to save as many people
as possible. We should try
to improve ourselves as far as we can, and
we are nothing yet;
But we can improve and
both the points if you put it all the
time, then it will work out. Like when
feel you should say, no, how can that
be? Mostly with left-sided people are
extremely, really rejected.
Now, the thoughts can come from the
left side also.
Now that you
come to the right side
Like, if you have some Bhoots in your
head, they can give you the thought that,
“Oh, you are useless or good for
nothing.” Now, raise your right side and
put down the left. Now why do we do this
? Because right side is the giver side and
due to that here you
get the Grace and put down the left side.
Such people who suffer from the left
side should try this. One more thing, is,
that first ideas come
to you or such thoughts that you are
good for nothing and all that,
it is better to beat yourself with shoes.
Go and sing the
praise of the Lord and
say that I am
so happy. I have got everything around me.
So you got everything.
Now, the second thing is about the right
side. On the right side, mostly you catch
on the Swadishthan. That is
because you think. This is another kind of
thinking which gives you catch
at right Swadishthan. At this we think,
whether it comes from left or right will
give first problem for your liver.
And the worst comes when both the
sides are involved. There are some Bhoots
which give you ideas that," Oh!
you are good for nothing," this and that,
and then you start
thinking that, "Oh! I am so great." And
such a wobbling starts coming
and the confusion starts building in.
So, one must understand that in Sahaja
Yoga, you are to develop that sharp edge,
that central point from which you do
not deviate to the right or the left and
This is something so subtle that you are
left sided, you are not going to remain
left sided. You might become
right-sided tomorrow. Exactly, tomorrow
you can come with a right-sided
problem. So, you must learn that balancing,
just like you start learning a bicycle,
you might fall on this side or that side.
Now, when do you learn cycling ? If somebody
ask me, I will say, “When you learn.”
I mean when you cycle
down, that’s the point when you learn.
So, in Sahaja Yoga, to balance
it, you have to watch yourself carefully.
Now, where does it go, to the
left side, alright then come to the right;
Now come to
the centre. You just separate yourself,
detach yourself all the
time, nor to criticize yourself neither to
aggress anybody else or to criticize
others. But use this point just to
see yourself, just to see and to
guide yourself. Guidance is very different
from getting lost.
Now that is what it is.
When a dead thing is lost,
supposing a dead thing is here.
Supposing it's a dead thing, I throw it.
It will fall at the point where I throw it.
But there's a living thing if I throw
it, it does not fall, where i throw it.
the living force knows how to guide
itself, nothing follows. In the same way
if you are living force
you will learn how to guide yourself.
If you have learnt
it, you have mastered Sahaja Yoga.
No use condemning yourself, in any way
or thinking that you are great or small.
But watch now, where the horse is going.
You are sitting on the top of the horse;
now you are no more the horse.
Before, Realization you are the horse.
Wherever the horse takes you, you go there.
If it sees the grass it eats the grass.
Will you eat the grass. Then the horse
wants to kick somebody, you kick the horse.
Now, you have come out of the
horse and sitting on the horse as a Rider.
Now you are the Rider and you must
know how you are befooled by these things.
And these are all old ancient
things revealed desired by you. And also
the aggression, the Karma that you are
doing are also point ancient because
by doing so you will get this, you will
get that. And when many people will say,
“Mother, we are doing this, so much Sahaja
Yoga; we have still not achieved anything”.
Now heart, if people are catching on
the heart, such people can never progress.
When the heart is the source of Light,
heart is the source of Brahma Shakti.
Heart is the seat of Atma. If your heart
is not enlightened when your heart is
the living
force, then how can you progress ?
So first clean your heart. Many people have
different types of powers, I would say.
Some people are guided, if
somebody tells them, you can follow them.
That's it. If there are some people who
tell them everything, so they're wrong.
You don't listen. That's
how it is. You must know what to choose.
This is what Sahaja Yoga should make of
you. You should grow, mature to that point
you should know where what to do. This
is the goal. Then you don't ask for that.
don't ask for that. You just do it
yourself as you try to solve the problem.
You told your friend first time
that what I do, I should
know what I'm doing.
I should know what is correct.
I should know how
to do it. I should know.
I is not the state,
cannot be. No more ego
exists or superego
exists, but it is the spirit
which exists. And you find something, you
realize, children? They are so much there.
No more ego exits or
super ego exits. It is the Spirit
that guides you and They
don't have such questions.
They know who is a
foolish person, who is stupid,
who talks foolishly. They
know who is caught up.
They are realized Souls. They are so much
there that they don't have these questions.
They know who is a follish question,
who is stupid, who talks so silly,
they know who is caught
up, they know whom to
shut up, whom to argue.
They know you. There are
They do not sympathize with people
who are caught up. No. They just watch.
If somebody comes, they be
telling, what has he, this fellow is
caught up. That's all. If somebody
comes, let him, he's all right.
That's it. If somebody comes, you
see, enjoy, that's all. They just continue.
They do not hate anyone. They do not
get worried about anything. They just sit.
If somebody comes with
a very bad aura, we say, let him go away.
He better get all right. That's
all. Without any malice about the person.
Once you are on top of the hill, then
you don't have to worry about the traffic.
But you are not at the top. That's
why you are worried and you think that
I'm climbing and falling from here. But
this whole thing is just a mental shadow.
It's a thought. You are on top of the hill.
But you are not assented. Ascension is not.
You must be seated!
Be seated!
You've been seated on the throne.
Sitting on the throne, you're begging.
Without the throne, everyone is crying.
Sitting on the throne,
everyone is acting mad.
What to do? Arrey Bhai, sit on the throne!
You are a king, sit down. And
give orders to your five fingers.
Sir! Now sit down, come on,
that’s enough. Now this is fine,
now that is fine; you've
understood all that very well now.
When you are able to command
yourself in this way, when
you are able to control
yourself completely, only then—
—are you a true Sahaja Yogi.
Otherwise you will say, while sitting, just
like others say, “What can I do, Mataji,
I try so hard to control my mind, but it
goes inward again.” Then what is the mind?
The mind is a living force, it will go.
Let it go, it’s a living force, it will go
only to the place where it’s meant to go.
It is all necessary to awaken our
qualities, and when they are awakened—
—we will keep dropping
many things, keep letting
go. Let them go; it won’t
happen without letting go.
And in all these things, you need
to keep only one thing in mind:
That our heart should
be pure, should be pure.
Those who have a pure
heart face fewer problems.
It means your impurities should be
cleansed. Purity means surrender.
If there is a lack of surrender
in Sahaja Yoga, or if one
thinks “I am special,” then
that person will have flaws.
No education is needed for that, no
special people are needed for that.
If it didn’t happen to me, if I
didn’t feel any experience—
does it mean the fault is
with you or with Sahaja Yoga?
People sometimes talk to me in such
a way, as if I had taken a contract for it.
They say, “You did nothing for us.
I’ve gone mad. My mother! We’ve been
coming to you for twenty-five years.”
Still the same twenty-five, twenty-five.
But nothing is going to
happen to you, what can I do?
So if it’s not happening, then it
means something is wrong within you.
But as soon as you detach yourself,
you will begin to see your own faults.
And as soon as you see them —
Rajesh, look here, he is like a king.
He is seated on the throne, and
he notices that some of his subjects
are misbehaving. “Stay quiet!”
— It’s not going to work like that.
Not like that — do this, do that.
A person should know
how to fully handle himself.
Certainly.
They are powerful.
So you’ll have to speak with them.
That will be the nature. Even a small
matter can be settled through conversation.
We want to talk to you, we observe.
They’re not even aware of
whom they are speaking with; and
if they do, they do in such a
manner, it’s quite astonishing.
There’s no more an understanding of
what we should say, and what we shouldn’t.
We should have control over our
tongue; that control will only come
when you observe detached from
self: “Is this tongue behaving properly?”
This also — people just don’t do. If I
have to do it, then what should I do?
It’s a new style, and then —
whom are you giving orders to?
Come on now, go on
as usual. A person who is
realized is always
cheerful, always joyful.
Come on, you have to go.
Come on now, sit over there.
Even the children say
[unclear] “Now this Nirmala
is not going to leave,
she’s siting here now.”
They speak in the Third Person.
Sahaja Yogis should
also speak in this way.
Gradually, one should
detach oneself from self.
The desires we have,
the ideas we have — the
remaining desires or
any other ideas we carry,
How long will you keep saying,
“I should do this, I should
do that.” Let go of all
that, and think: What
should I do for Sahaja Yoga?
What should we do for Sahaja Yoga?
Even now in India, this thing is
very little, but abroad it is very much.
Those people never come
and say to me that “My father's
grandfather's cousin
brother is not getting cured.”
Mother, please cure him.
That’s too much. So never
about their material things—
Not even once have they said it.
Never, or nothing — this is a
materialistic problem or something — never.
They appear to be worry-free.
Although... ... ... Look into their
eyes, such concentration; even if
someone speaks a single word in Hindi,
they will listen with full attention.
Nothing can be heard, oh!
How are vibrations emitting
from them, how are the
vibrations coming into the hands?
Which vibrations need to be corrected,
what is the problem?
[Unclear] Look, they gave their
whole life to Sahaja Yoga; and—
They can't give anything else.
Alright then, we’ll do
this too, we’ll do that too.
Only by giving your whole life
to Sahaja Yoga you truly grow.
This is also something I have to tell
you. You have nothing to lose in this.
You don’t fall short of anything.
Your whole life should
be given to Sahaja Yoga,
every single moment should
be given for Sahaja Yoga.
The meaning of Sahaj is to act spontaneously;
spontaneous—anytime, in any way.
Sahaja Yoga is a living, blissful power.
And then you won’t even
need to think [Unclear].
Because you people still
cannot enjoy; the one who truly
enjoys is only the Paramatma.
You cannot enjoy anything.
You are under the illusion
that you are enjoying something;
You simply cannot enjoy. The
enjoyer is also Paramatma, and He
is the Creator, and He is
[Unclear: “the creation too”]. You—
You are just like a  ‘wipe’ in between,
that’s how you are, so just observe—
And if you do not do anything,
if you do one thing, then Paramatma has
Immense love for you.
But this is the only act
you can do — to remain
completely in bliss.
Completely — otherwise, you cannot clearly
visualise anything else. Because the
one who enjoys anything is only Him.
That’s the thing — today you got one thing,
Then tomorrow you got another,
then a third, even then no satisfaction.
We should speak to God, only the one
who enjoys everything must always enjoy it.
Why do we, or you, need to enjoy anything?
Only that’s the joy that He
created the entire creation —
such a beautiful world,
so many things have been
given to us, and now
you’ve become Sahaja Yogis.
Within us, we can know God,
we can recognize ourselves.
We can recognize the spirit in others;
Because if the grace of
God is upon us — just thinking
and thinking of this, even
that becomes possible.
When you begin to enjoy
God this way, then you
will see that your hand
gives you realization.
[Unclear: In the entire
creation you... ... ... ]
This is my message to you today.
Start connecting with God, forget all other
enjoyments and begin to enjoy just God,
and if you enjoy Him, then what
more would you need from God?
What more do you need?
You will be able to
enjoy that. You will see—
You will see your life will
be completely transformed.
After coming into Sahaja Yoga,
every moment we should be thinking—
What have we received? What
have we received? We have received
so much, so much, so much;
we keep saying so. Come on.
First of all, your complaints will never
end. And you keep searching for vibrations.
Now if you have any questions, then ask.
[ Seeker asks some question]
Shri Mata ji: I told them that
what is the enjoy. [inaudible]
You can only enjoy God, and that is
the greatest thing you have ever seen,
what God has created for you. [inaudible:
what are you going to say about this]
He has given you human awareness by
which you can know how much he has done,
how much he has worked for you, how
much he has brought you to this level,
what he has given you, you can give
to others, you can make others happy.
If you take like that, immediately
you will know the science.
Sit.
[INAUDIBLE: SEEMS SOME
SEEKER MAY BE QUESTIONING.]
Left heart to right,
Why left heart is catching?
Because God doesn't have time, thank Him!
sahaj Yogi : Maa!
Why there is question of
dipression without being guilt?
Shri Mata ji: Without being .. ?
Sahaja Yogi: Guilty. Shri Mata Ji:
You see first he asked me the question,
" Why there is dippresion
without being guilty?"
If one get possessed,
you feel to get possessed,
but somehow you never
reach poise.
who talk of separation.
You need some quarenstile,
you allow brothers to
attend in Sahaj Yoga.
Don’t you listen to
Sahaja Yoga with great
interest? [Unclear] Then
whom do you listen to?
[Unclear: "Some conversation
with Sahaja Yogis"]
Very surprising, because in the
Granth Sahib all about the realized
souls’ [Unclear: is written].
Here, sorrow is definitely there.
There is no doubt about this;
depression must certainly happen here.
That's why like fools they keep
reading them, do nothing. [Unclear]
Even in Gurudwaras, in
the Granth Sahib, there’s
nothing that isn’t specially
found in Nanak Sahib.
But he included all the realized
souls—what Kabir, all, whoever he found.
Be it Kabir or Nagdev,
whoever they were—he compiled
the Granth Sahib with
all the realized souls.
But those who read it must themselves be
depressive—what can be done about that?
All those whose minds
are messed up—God save!
Because… [Unclear]
And secondly, it's a place
where they don’t know
about realized souls,
nothing—they read like fools.
Nanak Sahib said everything—he
said, search what is inside;
search! They're just reading
“search, search, search.”
[Unclear]
This will definitely lead to
depression if you mix up with
such people. If you dwell with
such people, you won’t ascend.
Having attained it, by
staying with such people—
—joy.
Understood, right?
What are you asking?
[Unclear conversation]
Alright, ask! ‘Bhai’, ask!
[Unclear]
Why, where are you going?
Seeker: [Inaudible] Shri Mata ji: 'Aanh'
Seeker: [Inaudible]
Shri Mata Ji: Are you here? Seeker:
[Inaudible] Shri Mata ji: You go.
You want to come to staff.
Seeker: Staff! [inaudible]
.. .. You can come home.
Shri Mata ji: Are you
here? Seeker: [Inaudible.]
Shri Mata ji: Yes, I will
come home. Seeker: 'Aanh!'
I'll come little
late after the staff.
Seeker: I will bring you home. Shri Mata
ji: 'Aanh!' Seeker: I will bring you home.
Other Seeker: [Inaudible]
Brahma Ji, Brahma Ji!
[Unclear conversation]
Everyone will
meet in the morning.
Sahaja Yogi: Mataji, we
will come after having food!
Shri Mataji: Alright.
This, which is more from our left
side—[unclear]—you understood, right?
Put the left side inward,
and the right side outward.
At night, you should not
roam around too much.
Another thing is, like listening
to the stories of dead souls—
This should not be done. [Unclear...]
Look deep within—it’s very good.
Things that are meant to frighten, etc.,
are very powerful—you should avoid them.
It’s very surprising—in this, the whole
scene is seen by realized souls, and
how possession
happens is written in it,
what depression
is like, what it does.
What happens is—depression also comes from
this—that the person becomes possessed.
This is the worst of all.
For that we have ['inaudible…'] in
Sahaja Yoga, not 'outside Sahaja.'
For that, there is [unclear] in Sahaja
Yoga—not something outside Sahaja Yoga.
So, keep your left hand on your left side
and your right hand outward in this manner.
Everything is written
down, so you should come
to the center; because
so that, you are [unclear]
In correction mode—what is
written in Sahaja Yoga—[unclear]
It has to be done every day, washing
of the feet has to be done every day;
It is just a, more important than just
bathing. It is much much more important,
as well as is a snana, is a
bath, every day you have to do it.
[Unclear conversation]
Shri Mataji: Alright!
Sahaja Yogi: Mother! I just want
to ask one thing. Shri Mataji: What?
Sahaja Yogi: I want to ask you
a question. Shri Mataji: What?
Whether different *asanas*
(postures) for different
chakras can be beneficial
for Sahaja Yogis, I mean,
can it be helpful if different...
Shri Mataji: Yes, they should do it.
Then please suggest
*asanas* for different chakras.
Shri Mataji: Look, Sahaja
Yoga is something that
comes from inside to
outside, not outside to inside.
Understand? Sahaja Yogi: Okay!
First, correct your chakras,
then come to your mind.
First observe your mind;
until you've corrected
your chakras physically,
that won’t be resolved.
So then think
about what is living!
What rises from within— from this alone,
all the power spreads in all directions.
Now, what’s the use if you’ve only
made your outer surroundings good,
and inside, if [unclear: some worm
rises, then how will the worm…]?
That’s why I don’t
profess *asanas* much.
If the *asanas* are everything ,
then everyone will just sit doing it;
I’ve seen that if I tell someone one
*asana*, they keep doing only that—oh!
I said, your [unclear: thing is now
cured], then why are you still doing it?
That’s why I don’t
emphasize *asanas* too much.
Actually, inside us is a tendency
that we must do something.
If I say, “Stand on your
head every day,” then better
than breaking your head,
just stand firmly on the truth.
Somehow, the man must
has to do some such thing.
If there’s nothing else,
then go hang from the fan.
We can’t even sit peacefully for
five minutes—this is the misery.
Now if I start teaching
*asanas*, then in a few days,
you’ll see everyone doing
gymnastics in front of me.
So, it’s better, ‘Baba’! just meditate.
We don’t need any *asanas*.
So, if we say what happens
just by doing asanas,
otherwise I’ve seen people—when I told them
about *Bahastrika*, their attention breaks.
I saw people [unclear:
while meditating], I said,
"’Bhai’, is this meditation
or something else
going on?" If at all
something is there, then its the
attention. [unclear]—so it is
all what is happening here?
Even *bandhan*, giving *bandhan* also has
its own charm when you sit in meditation.
So that you can keep
your mind set. These are all
external—*bandhan*; You are
saying, you people on their way.
[Unclear]
First fix your mind;
if you're complaining,
then your mind needs
to be set right. If you’re
aggressive, your mind
needs to be corrected.
Correct the mind
first—the mind comes first.
Everything arises from the
mind—get control over the mind.
If your hand or foot is actually
broken, then that you can get treated.
But now even that can
be healed by Kundalini.
That’s why *asanas*
shouldn’t be given too much
focus— first attention
on God, first attain God,
letting go the power of God, don’t you find
it strange, all this obsession with asanas?
Doesn't it seem strange?
Like one gentleman, he said
his plane got missed. [Unclear]
Now he came and slept in
our drawing room. He said,
“I’m a great yogi.” I
said, “Alright, now what?”
He said, “I sleep
on a hard cot.”
I said, “We don’t have
a cot here. This is a
‘Deevan’— you can sleep
on it, sleep comfortably.”
He said, “I don’t sleep on just anything.”
So I said, “Then sleep on the floor,
do whatever you like.” He said,
“Wake me up at four o'clock.”
We said, “Brother, we’ll
wake you up. My wife wakes
up at four, she’ll wake
you too—now go to sleep.”
Now if you create a
nuisance for others, [unclear]
[Unclear] You go to
someone’s house—
[Unclear] What happened? He saw it was
already five o’clock! I said, “What happened?”
Sahab said that as soon as he
went inside, he saw him lying like this!
[Unclear] “What should
I do now?” I said, “Let
it go— Good thing you
didn’t ask...” [Unclear]
[Inaudible]
He said, “So then what should be
done? What’s the treatment for this?”
I said, “Just keep doing
this—what else?” He
said, “I even tried leaving
it like this and saw…”
So just sitting, sitting,
sitting like this [unclear],
it doesn't make sense—there's
something else going on.
Even before, the same [unclear]
[Unclear]
There shouldn’t be such a thing
that someone else sees and [unclear]
[Unclear: such a spectacle], there is
no need for all this drama [..unclear]
Like in Sahaja Yoga, Kundalini
rises up [unclear] Now look, one
gentleman used to do *asanas*, it
took twenty years to wean him off them.
Whenever he came to the
program, his acrobatics would begin. If
you told him to raise his hands,
he would lift his legs instead.
[Inaudible]
Sahaja Yoga is a magnificent
thing. Why have you gone searching
for all this? [Unclear] There
is no need for any *asanas*.
Understand which of
your chakras are caught.
Sahaja Yogi: [Unclear] Shri
Mataji: [Hain] What! Sahaja
Yogi: How will sleep
come, Shri Mataji! [Unclear]
Shri Mataji: [Hain]
What! [Unclear]
Suppose sleep comes, [unclear]
it is the tendency of the mind.
[Hindi phrase means]
Once one gets detached with
the mind, the wish of
the mind gets full filled.
It’s the mind, the mind
that is seated there.
You went looking here and
there, do this, do that—‘Bha’
what for, why are you
doing this? Enjoy peacefully.
I already said that you have to experience
the fire of the Divine, and [audio break]
When a person is like
this, asked him about the
lecture, there is no
attention—then its not all right.
I was even getting done some thing
in the early stages but they were not
accepting it. Otherwise, silently take
the breath down, bring it up [unclear]
Until something disastrous
doesn’t happen to them [unclear]
Please come in,
be seated! [Unclear]
This is like a feast—understand
that you’re at a feast. And if
someone starts doing *asanas*
at a feast, what will people say?
It’s for enjoyment—you enjoy it. Why
are you creating chaos for no reason?
This thing doesn’t make sense
that creating chaos [unclear]
Whoever understands this
point, they will get realization.
[Unclear]
[Unclear: That Lang
Sahib...] He couldn’t do
anything, he read the
entire Ramayana, read
the Bhagavata too. He didn’t leave anything,
did every odd thing—you did everything!
What in this life, what in the previous
life, what in the life before that?
Now, when the time has come
to reap the fruit— so why are you
doing *asanas*? You’re offering
someone fruit to eat, and they…
[Unclear]
Yogi: Shri Mataji, should one bathe before
sitting for meditation in the morning?
Shri Mataji: Not necessary.
It’s not necessary to bathe—if your body’s
[unclear: condition is fine], then just sit.
If it’s not fine, then do bathe.
[Unclear] Bathing and washing is all
[unclear]—cleanse the mind. First and
foremost, the mind should be clean. A
person who is cleansing the mind— [unclear]
before that, even that dirt, [unclear]
Once [inaudible], said
something and caught a cold.
I said, "You take a
bath”; I said, "Alright then
take three names”. He didn’t
believe. As soon as he took the
three names, no bad smell
in the nose or body. [inaudible]
Why bathe? Three days without bathing.
You people don’t bathe? [inaudible]
Sahaj Yogi: [inaudible] Shri Mataji:
[‘Haan’] What! Sahaj Yogi: Some people
don’t bathe for a whole month there,
and still they don’t have any problem.
Shri Mataji: Hmm! Sahaj Yogi: Those
people also... [inaudible conversation]
Those people are not at all
clean. [inaudible] People should
bathe daily. Those who should
bathe, are exactly those people.
And like us... [inaudible]
Meaning bathing and washing
is not at all necessary. This all...
I am telling about extreme cases. But
such people must bathe daily, extreme
[inaudible] Very dirty, extremely
dirty. [inaudible] Ask them. They don’t
even think they’re dirty,
[inaudible: they think they’re clean.]
If they have to get vibrations, they
will; if we don’t, then fine. They are
very dirty people. They smell a lot. I
make them wash their hands six times.
They go to the bathroom
and don’t even wash their
hands afterward. Such
filthy people they are!
These people are all... [inaudible]
Did a lot for these people; As for us...
In collectivity, if there's
household dirt, throw
it in the trash. Outwardly
it should be clean.
They themselves will bathe,
but their children... [inaudible]
It’s very cold there,
and they have it a lot.
They’ll keep the outside
cleaner than the inside.
Whatever the
thing is... it’s dirty.
Bathing and washing does
give some freshness to the body.
But it's not necessary that if you
haven’t bathed, you can't meditate.
This is what I keep
saying... [inaudible]
When you practise this, if you bathe, fine;
If you skip one day, what’s the big deal?
Nothing is above you.
Everything is below you.
If you bathe, it’s good.
[inaudible] Did you hear their story?